=== DNNK Webinar Transskription ===
Kategori: Godmorgen_med_DNNK
Video ID: ZnNmeyyKCok
URL: https://youtube.com/watch?v=ZnNmeyyKCok
Kilde: lokal transskription (faster-whisper small, dansk)
Transskriberet: 2026-08-07T07:32:24.475363

==================================================

00:00:00
God morgen, og velkommen til et DNNK god morgenøbner. I dag skal vi høre Mia Braul, præsentere hendes PhD-resultater om forståelse af social retfærdighed i danske klimatilpasning. Oplægget er på engelsk, og jeg er mikrofoner ved at være slukket under vejs. I har mulighed for at stille spørgsmål løbende i chatten, som jeg så vil læse op til sidst.

00:00:30
Og jeg er også meget velkommen til at stille jer spørgsmål på dansk. Eller så vil jeg give ordet til dig, Mia. Ja, tak, Anna. God morgen. Jeg er skæftelig til engelsk her. My name is Mia Castig Braul, og i momenten er jeg en postdoc i Center for Blue Governance at Aalborg University. Men i dag vil jeg tale om min PhD-projekt, som jeg bare finaliserede i mænden, sammen med Kystdirektoratet og Aalborg University,

00:01:00
som har været om at forstå og oprysne konceptet af færdighed i Kystdirektoratet og Aalborg University. Så jeg starter i dag med at give en lidt mere kontakt med den PhD-projekt, og vi taler lidt om hvad jeg mener med denne konceptet af færdighed. Og så vil jeg give en overvægge af de tre analyser, som vi har gjort sammen med min PhD. Så først en næste skræning af færdighed, en næste analys af færdighed i kontakt med Køge Bugt Strandpark,

00:01:30
og en næste analys, som har eksperimentet med at bruge kunstfærdige metoder, for at supporte færdighed i færdighed i kontakt med naturfærdighed. Og så ender jeg med nogle kvile tilfærdigheder i en del af en patient i Danmark, og prøver at diskutere, hvor vi skal gøre fra her. Når jeg går til kontaktet, vil jeg bare sige, at det har været en industriale PhD-projekt.

00:02:00
Så jeg har gjort denne PhD i en kollaboration med den Kystdirektoratet, som også Aalborg Universitet, og projekteret var partially fundet med Innovation Fund Danmark fra deres industriale PhD-program, og også partially fundet med og embedtet ved denne Horizon Europe projekte Regions4Climate, som skriver just transition i 12 europee regionsfærdige, en af dem er Krube, her i Danmark. Så denne forskningprojekt var virkelig for at komme ud af en forståelse,

00:02:30
at klimatrykket og også oftest de adaptationer, som vi implementer, skriver på kvistfærdige kvistfærdige, og kan skrive næste kvistfærdige kvistfærdige. Og også adaptationen er forældre at gæne trækken internationelt, men det har ikke været stødt i Danmark samt til nu. Så vi Dingens Io monopoli, viser ikke nogen cataye. Så på min arbejde på denne PhD skulle jeg sætte på. Hvordanchauestesskåline skriver i Kvistfærdige kvistfærdige futuro róż Prince Ment había

00:03:00
ogharemente ud af, så vi kan sige at sommerersæultat til det egen. Og jeg har compliance sammen så norske assenter. Den første pers makeupen I reassichen med Kvistfærdige Saudiom på en næste skale. Den seneste er at tænke på en lokal etableringsprojekt og tænke på at tænke på projekten af rækognitionale løsning. Og så sidste sidste er at tænke på et etableringsmæssige metoder

00:03:30
for at tænke på procedurale løsning igen på en lokal skale. Så hvad vil jeg faktisk betale, når jeg taler om løsning i relation til etableringsplanning? Løsning er generellem en koncept, der er gammelt af de sætterne og løsninger af løsning, og det er så jeg har brugt det i dette projekt. Så først har du distributivt løsning, som refereret til etableringsløsning af løsninger og tilvendelser,

00:04:00
både af klimatrætterne-løsninger som flotter, men også af etableringspræsenter. Så det er virkelig om løsninger af løsninger. Så vi har procedurale løsning, som løsninger til betalt inklusion af næsten og prioriterier af olika grupper i alle steder af etableringsplanning. Så det er virkelig om løsninger til etableringspræsenter. Og løsninger af løsning er om løsning og løsninger af løsninger og prioriterering af løsninger i etableringsplanning.

00:04:30
Så det er mere om løsninger af marginalisering og struktureløsning. Og senere har vi løsninger af løsning, der er om at tænke om, hvordan vi kan løsninger eller tænke om, hvordan vi kan løsninger og løsninger via etableringspræsenter. Så vi kan tænke om en historisk, men også strukturel løsning. Og i dette PhD har vi fokuseret primært på de første tre løsninger af løsning her. Så i løsning til løsninger af løsning,

00:05:00
jeg har tænkt mig at forstå, hvilke socialgrupper færdes på løsninger af løsninger på et nationelt skæl. I løsning til procedurale løsning, har jeg tænkt mig at forstå, hvilke løsninger kan være brugt til at sætte mere løsninger af etableringspræsenter og specifisk naturale løsninger med underrepresenterende eller marginaliserende eller vennerne grupper. Og i løsning til løsninger af løsning, jeg har tænkt mig at forstå, hvordan de different kind of identities, and values and preferences

00:05:30
of different social groups have been reflected or perhaps left out of adaptation planning. Så det bringer mig til the first analysis of the PhD, which is this national screening of distributive justice. And so this analysis has essentially been about assessing which social groups face the burden of coastal flooding. And this study was coming out of a recognition that there's still really a lack of empirical approaches for operationalizing distributive justice,

00:06:00
which means there's often quite a limited understanding of which social groups are most exposed to hazards. And in this case, especially in relation to coastal flooding. And in Denmark, we also often have this kind of implicit perception that coastal flooding is perhaps mostly a problem for more wealthy homeowners that are living, for example in the first row of houses closest to the coast. So with this analysis, I also wanted to kind of test that hypothesis and see

00:06:30
whether it actually is those that are more well off that are facing the burden of coastal flooding, or if it might instead be more socially vulnerable groups that are more exposed to these coastal flood events. So this study was a collaboration with several colleagues at the Coastal Authority as well as Aalborg University. And to assess this question of distributive justice, we used existing national scale models of social flood vulnerability and social exposure. And I'm not going to talk too much

00:07:00
about these models today, so I just wanted to refer her to a paper that I published together with some colleagues from the Coastal Authority where we detail the methodology behind these models in more depth. And these models have also been adopted in the most recent appointment of risk areas under the EU Floods Directive. So you can also find more information about them on the Coastal Authority's website. But just to give you a bit of a background, this analysis was basically trying to compare social

00:07:30
vulnerability and social exposure models to see which social groups are most exposed to coastal flood events. So to do this, we were using this social flood vulnerability index, or SVI. The SVI is a national index-based model of social flood vulnerability and it maps five indicators age, health, socio-economic situation, ability to acquire and understand information and neighborhood resilience. And these indicators are mapped on a 100 meter grid cell scale nationally.

00:08:00
And then the social exposure model that we used includes two categories. So it's first of all looking at direct exposure to flooding, which is when basically the dwelling that you live in is directly flooded. And then it also includes this element of indirect exposure, which refers to loss of access to critical service infrastructure due to a flood event. So this could be things like utilities like electricity or water, but also other services such as hospitals, doctors, emergency services,

00:08:30
things like that. And so in very simple terms, to assess distributive justice, we basically started by categorising this national mapping of SVI into 20 groups so that we could end up with essentially 5% quantiles of vulnerability. So we would be able to say, for example, that group 20 represents the 5% most vulnerable share of the population. And with that categorisation, we could then calculate the share of exposure

00:09:00
that's faced by each SVI group for a probabilistic set of coastal flood events. So for example, including a 100 year event, a 1000 year event, etc. And then based on this, we were able to construct a measure of expected exposure, which is essentially a weighted average that measures the share of exposure faced by each of these SVI groups during kind of different return period events, again 10 year, 100 year, etc., taking into account the probability

00:09:30
of those events. So basically just an average expected exposure across these different groups given the full range of coastal flood events. And then finally, we also wanted to create kind of a more quantitative measure to actually assess issues of distributive justice. So we calculated what we call an exposure disparity measure, which is basically a quantitative measure that compares the share of exposure faced by the most versus the least vulnerable groups.

00:10:00
So for example, we could compare the share of exposure faced by the 10% most vulnerable share of the population versus the 10% least vulnerable. And I'll show you a bit what I mean here with some of the key results from this study. So we basically found that on average groups with higher social vulnerability face higher expected exposure to coastal flood events on a national scale. So if you look at the figure here on the slide, you can see on the X axis that

00:10:30
SVI Group 20, which corresponds to the 5% most vulnerable share of the population faces significantly more expected exposure than for example SVI Group 1, which corresponds to the 5% least vulnerable share of the population. And if you look at the table on the slide here as well, you can see the exposure disparity measure that I mentioned a minute ago. So for example, if we look at the EDM 10% value here,

00:11:00
this is showing us that the 10% most vulnerable face 2.81 times more exposure than the 10% least vulnerable. And it's interesting to note that this trend is also consistent when we calculate other EDMs. For example, the EDM 50%, this is basically just comparing the exposure faced by the most vulnerable half of the population versus the least vulnerable half of the population. And we still see that the most vulnerable half

00:11:30
is facing 1.62 times more exposure than the least vulnerable half. And so as part of this study, we also made these same calculations for different Danish regions and for different city sizes. And we actually found that vulnerable groups face higher levels of expected exposure in 4 out of 5 Danish regions with the exception of Zealand and then also in all city sizes. So kind of small towns, midsize cities, urban areas, etc.

00:12:00
Except for rural areas. So these really were kind of trends that we're seeing across the country and in many different ways. And these results really reveal that distributive justice is a clear problem. So we are seeing that socially vulnerable groups face a disproportionate share of exposure to coastal flooding nationally. And this is quite interesting because it really goes directly against the implicit hypothesis that I mentioned earlier. That wealthy homeowners living in kind of the first row

00:12:30
might be facing more of the brunt of coastal flood impacts. So it really shows that we need to be looking kind of beyond this first row and take a closer look at how different vulnerable groups are impacted by flood events. Unfortunately, what this study does not tell us is why we see these patterns. So further research is definitely needed there. But it could for example be related to the fact that historically there's been a focus on building structural

00:13:00
coastal protection defences to protect perhaps higher value economic assets. So this could have contributed to a situation where more vulnerable areas are not as well protected. This trend could also for example relate to structural inequity in historical development patterns. So for example perhaps social housing developments have been disproportionately placed in areas that are especially exposed to flood events. These are just some hypotheses we don't know but further research on these

00:13:30
questions will definitely be necessary. And that brings me to the second analysis of my Ph.D. Which looks at a different pillar of justice altogether and also shifts from a national to a local scale. So basically after understanding these kind of national scale challenges related to distributed justice. This was about establishing really a baseline and understanding kind of what are the current challenges now.

00:14:00
And then I wanted to shift my attention towards understanding more local experiences of injustice and also shift from looking at the justice implications of hazards, so of coastal flooding more towards the justice implications of the adaptation responses that we're implementing. So in this case nature based solutions. And so with that in mind this analysis was looking at recognitional justice in relation to nature based solutions. And nature based solutions are increasingly

00:14:30
being popularized as these really like win win best practice adaptation solutions that can deliver adaptation function while also providing a whole range of social and ecological co-benefits. But increasingly we're seeing that critical research is pointing towards a lot of justice challenges. So for example when NBS are implemented in more kind of vulnerable or underprivileged neighborhoods they can lead to green gentrification and in the worst places

00:15:00
in the worst cases a displacement of certain groups. And then on the other hand we might see that nature based solutions are for example selectively implemented in wealthy neighborhoods or perhaps are designed in such a way that they only provide selective benefits to certain social groups and kind of overlook the needs or preferences of others. So this was the kind of angle that I came into this study with and I wanted to look at some of these issues

00:15:30
in the case of Køge Bugt Strandpark. I'm sure many of you are familiar with this area but it's basically a large scale barrier island solution that was developed back in the 1970s so it's a very early example of this type of quite large scale landscape based NBS and it provides recreational nature and coastal protection to five municipalities over seven kilometers of coastline so it is quite a large scale solution

00:16:00
and the area is also currently undergoing modernization to increase coastal protection in light of climate change and update the recreational facilities which are quite outdated as well. And so to assess recognition of justice within the case of Køge Bugt Strandpark this analysis took point of departure in the concept of welfare landscapes. So welfare landscapes refer to areas where certain welfare values have been

00:16:30
really physically embedded into the design of a space. So by conceptualizing Køge Bugt Strandpark as a welfare landscape the idea with this analysis was really to try to understand kind of which values and and whose values have actually been planned and designed into this area. So I looked first of all at which groups used the beach park but also for example at whose values and visions have been embedded into this space

00:17:00
through the design and the planning of the area and whose might have been left out. So ultimately this analysis was really attempting to understand if the area is living up to its own slogan which is with the landscape for the people and trying to understand is the beach park serving all of the people or are there certain groups that have been left out more under prioritised in this area.

00:17:30
And to answer these questions I conducted fieldwork in the area together with a team of I think over 20 different colleagues and we spent two weeks in the beach park back in February and May of 2024 where we conducted structured participant observation to observe which groups were using the area and how and also conducted informal interviews with users of the area to gather kind of user perspectives on likes and dislikes

00:18:00
about the area, wishes for the future things that were missing things like that. And then in August 2024 we supplemented this fieldwork with more informal interviews in the neighbouring areas in each of the five municipalities that border the beach park and this was really to gather perspectives of locals who might not use the beach park or who might not be able to access it for whatever reason and in total we conducted

00:18:30
641 interviews and recorded I think several thousand of these kind of structured observation templates so we ended up with quite a bit of data around user perceptions of this area. And basically the results of this study revealed three main themes in relation to national justice. So these were safety accessibility and this idea of nature versus life. So 110 people

00:19:00
that we interviewed brought up safety issues within the beach park this was not something that we specifically asked about but it was something that people would bring up when we asked about their concerns with the area or things that they disliked or things like that. And of the people that brought up safety these were significantly more likely to be women that raised these concerns. So there was a lot of concerns for example around men in the area and kind of concerns around

00:19:30
assault or harassment. One interview we mentioned that men stand and stare at young women and another mentioning for example that to come here at night as a woman is out of the question and there were a lot of these kind of similar sentiments around concerns using the area. And then 79 people also brought up accessibility concerns and these were related to either accessing the beach park or moving around within it. And here again women but also people over

00:20:00
65 were significantly more likely to bring up these concerns. So they would say things like for example I come here with my grandmother and she cannot walk so long so it's difficult for her because benches are missing and people also mentioning that the facilities for people with disabilities were quite poor and something really must be done for the disabled. So this was also kind of a major theme and then the last key theme that we saw

00:20:30
was more of this kind of contradiction between nature versus life where different users have competing claims to the area as a space that should really be for wild nature versus more community connection and life. So we see for example some people expressing a lot of concern that this area kind of stays wild and it should not become a Barbie land. We should take care of nature down here and then on the other hand a lot of people mentioning that the beach park is this really large area

00:21:00
with many users and it's too bad that it's not more attractive. And so these issues of safety and accessibility and these kind of competing claims as to what the area should be for reveal certain challenges of recognition justice that can actually be linked quite directly to the original design philosophy of the area. So when the beach park was designed back in the in the 1970s or even earlier but when it was developed in the 1970s it was designed according to this

00:21:30
concept of use and protect and this led to the creation of these really concentrated areas of use. So facilities, recreational areas, cafes, whatever it might be surrounded by these really large areas of unspoilt or pristine nature. And we can see today that these design decisions have created a space where some users feel unsafe and some people are unable to use the area comfortably. And so this raises a question of who has this area been built for

00:22:00
and whether consciously or unconsciously is this a space that's really designed for mobile active users and this in turn also kind of raises questions about now that this area is being modernized and redeveloped, how could we think about reexamining these kind of welfare landscapes that have been or welfare values that have been kind of landscaped into the area to ensure recognition justice and kind of recognition of these groups that may have been left out in the future of the area.

00:22:30
And so this analysis also revealed a couple of interesting findings beyond the context of the beach park itself. So first of all, even though we didn't actually ask about it, multiple interviewees brought up to the Netto Home and they were raising concerns about for example water quality and downstream impacts. And this was quite an interesting finding because it also illustrates that not only do we need to be paying

00:23:00
attention to justice within specific NBS projects but that as NBS become kind of these increasingly popularized adaptation solutions we might actually be seeing justice issues that arise between or across NBS projects. And in this case in particular it raises this interesting dilemma because we have on the one hand the Netto Home which is quite a prestige project designed for this specific class of urban elite and we might question

00:23:30
how this type of solution is impacting the residents of festein which is historically underprivileged and stigmatized area. So there's a lot of interesting dynamics there within the greater Copenhagen area at large. And then secondly this kind of interaction between different generations of NBS solutions also raises questions more about how justice issues might develop or change over time.

00:24:00
So Køge Bugt Strandpark was really developed under this strong social democratic planning paradigm and it was developed with active consideration regarding social benefits and recreational needs and things like that and yet we're still seeing certain challenges of recognitional justice there. So this also raises the question of what justice outcomes might we see in the NBS projects that are being implemented today?

00:24:30
Where planning is really guided much more by this more neoliberalized and profit centric planning logic where nature based solutions are often being kind of used as these vehicles of financial or capital gain. So these are some of the kind of broader implications of this study and point to the fact that justice will become kind of even more important in nature based solutions in the future. And this brings us to the third and final analysis

00:25:00
of the PhD and so once understanding these more like recognition of justice challenges in Køge Bugt Strandpark I wanted to design a study that could perhaps help to provide an approach to tackling some of these challenges by including underrepresented groups in the local area in envisioning its future. And so this led me to this analysis experimenting with arts based methods

00:25:30
to see how those might be able to support just co-creation of nature based solutions. So as I'm sure many of you recognize citizen engagement in adaptation projects can be really challenging. It can be resource intensive, time intensive can raise a lot of conflicts and be a site of a lot of tension and then it's often just always the same groups or the same types of people that show up to citizen meetings. So it can be quite difficult to ensure broad and diverse

00:26:00
representation. And this challenge was really the background for this study and I wanted to understand if there were some kind of innovative or creative approaches to involving citizens in a different way that could start to tackle some of these challenges. And so I started to look into arts based research methods and arts based methods are gaining a lot of traction in sustainability literature lately as this new way of engaging, using methods

00:26:30
inspired by the creative arts. So that could be for example participatory theater, it could be creating drawings or paintings together with different actors it could be writing short stories anything really related to artistic practices. And the idea with these methods is that arts based approaches can really encourage more out of the box thinking and collective imagination they can perhaps disrupt norms and kind of break down

00:27:00
silos between different actors and they can support different actors in kind of relating in new ways that we might not be used to relating in. But there hasn't really been much work linking these arts based methods with justice so that was also my goal with this analysis to look into whether these approaches could support more procedural justice when we're doing these co-creation processes related to climate change adaptation.

00:27:30
And so to look into some of these questions I wanted to design some arts based workshops basically with underrepresented groups and these workshops were centered on the future of Køge Bugt Strandpark so still working within the same area but trying to understand what underrepresented groups might envision for the areas future. And so the first step here was to actually interview local municipalities to find out which groups are difficult for them to include in planning

00:28:00
or which groups often kind of don't show up when they're invited to citizen meetings and we heard from them that it's really always the same people showing up. It's often men, often people over 65 often kind of specific homeowners living in the front row etc. And we heard that certain groups so for example youth young families with children residents who don't speak Danish that these can be very difficult groups to include.

00:28:30
So we started to reach out to a lot of different organizations that work with these groups and eventually got in touch with a social housing secretariat in Brøndby Strand where we were able to conduct two different workshops so we conducted one workshop with a group of first generation immigrant women learning Danish so they were enrolled in this pre-existing class that was preparing them for the

00:29:00
ninth grade in Denmark and then we did a second workshop with a group of mostly second generation immigrant mothers who were involved in this existing play group with their children in the same area. And so together with this organization we designed this future visioning workshop approach based on the kind of artistic practice of collage

00:29:30
and just give you a bit of overview of how this process went. We spent kind of three days in the area and on the first day we took the participants from each of these workshops to visit the site to kind of look around at the beach park and see start thinking about what they would envision for the future or what the problems might be now. And then on the two following days we had these future visioning workshops where we gave an introduction to the area and presented a bit about the context.

00:30:00
And then we had this future visioning exercise where participants were asked to envision Køge Bugt Strandpark in 2035 using collage basically. So they were creating these group collages together and trying to kind of visualize what their desired future might look like. And then we had some group discussions based on this around what the collage that they had created meant to them shared a meal together and then we also ended with this focus group where we

00:30:30
sat together with the facilitators that had been present and tried to understand how these workshops had gone according to procedural justice principles essentially. So here you can see there were kind of two lenses through which we tried to analyze these workshops. Of course first of all we wanted to know what workshop participants actually envisioned for the future of the beach park. So we looked at what activities and facilities they would like for the future how they envisioned

00:31:00
the landscape and nature to be in the future what users were present in their desired future. And then how people lived with water and handled kind of sustainability issues. And then we also wanted to look at how the workshops performed according to procedural justice. So we also tried to analyze these workshops according to different elements for example equitable power sharing recognizing diverse and plural ways of knowing

00:31:30
fostering an environment where there was trust and respect supporting reciprocity and mutual learning and then also being these flexible spaces that supported different needs. And so here you can see a couple of the collages that were created during these workshops and what we found was that mostly participants focused on activities and facilities of the future and kind of users of the future

00:32:00
and there was still engagement with for example landscape and nature themes and some engagement with living with water in the future and sustainability aspects but overwhelmingly the focus was on kind of facilities and users and we really found that the overwhelming kind of red thread I guess of these collages was that the beach park should be a place for everyone so there was this really strong focus on solidarity with other groups particularly

00:32:30
kind of all of the groups mentioned children elderly people with disabilities were mentioned repeatedly and people were kind of saying things like it's important that different people come to the beach for example children disabled people, some people have strollers we need to have special paths for them so they can get there easily so there was also a lot of attention to some of the same issues that we discovered in the previous analysis I talked about around what we didn't see was

00:33:00
sorry we saw a lot of practical suggestions so we didn't see a lot of really kind of out of the box or creative ideas like we might have expected from these more creative methods but what we did see were some really kind of concrete suggestions that would be quite feasible for municipalities to actually implement and take forward so it was quite a practical exercise as well in that sense and then in relation to procedural justice we found that these workshops

00:33:30
generally performed quite well overall they were a really positive experience for the participants and we saw really quite active engagement and the collage method especially really allowed room for kind of flexible participation so people could write and draw and discuss and kind of whatever they preferred and this was especially relevant for these target groups because for eksempel in the language learning context it was difficult for some people to kind of discuss

00:34:00
extensively in Danish so using a visual method kind of made it easier for people to express their ideas and kind of point to certain concepts and ask okay how do you say this in Danish or whatever it might be and also in relation to the workshop that we did with mothers there were a lot of babies and small children present here as well and this was a really flexible format that allowed people to kind of dip in and out of the workshop experience as they were able to considering that they were also parenting

00:34:30
at the time and we also saw that this approach allowed people to engage kind of with their emotions and personal experiences around the topic and also created this room for relationship building and learning especially in relation to the workshop we did with the Danish learners there was also opportunities to kind of use this as an educational experience as part of their existing work we did see some weaknesses in relation to kind of power dynamics

00:35:00
within small groups, some people being more vocal things like that and with these target groups especially again with language learners it was somewhat difficult to get a huge amount of critical reflection on the topic that was quite new to a lot of participants and there were some comprehension challenges but overall quite a positive experience and one of the key takeaways from this process was really this idea that perhaps arts-based methods

00:35:30
could be a useful approach for kind of grounding attempts to increase procedural justice and engage in just adaptation in a more kind of place-based manner and in an approach that's grounded more in this idea of care and solidarity so as I mentioned the kind of results that came out of this workshop were really strongly aligned with ideas of care and solidarity and kind of caring for everyone and they were really closely aligned with this idea that comes from

00:36:00
care ethics scholarship around caring with and this basically refers to the fact that caring needs and the ways in which they're met need to be consistent with democratic commitments to justice, equality and freedom, so again linking quite closely to this idea of care for all care for different groups, care for the planet care for this space that we're in and this idea of solidarity so this also raises the question of whether arts-based methods for example

00:36:30
could be a way to reorient climate change adaptation participation processes which can often really be a space of tension and conflict towards a more kind of caring approach where diverse actors actually get the chance to come together and reimagine these ideas of just and desirable coastal futures together in a different way so that's also something that would be useful to have further research on I think yeah so that brings me to

00:37:00
some of the key takeaways from the PhD project at large and so based on the three analyses that I've just talked about we can conclude that we do see justice problems in Danish coastal adaptation planning so we see for example distributive injustice at a national scale we see problems of recognitional justice in relation to local NBS projects and then we see this uneven

00:37:30
representation of certain groups within citizen engagement and so how should we start to address these problems because this was an industrial PhD together with the Danish coastal authority part of my work was also to develop some recommendations for the coastal authority and for how they could contribute to tackling some of these challenges specifically from the position of a national authority so I want to share a few of these recommendations now

00:38:00
these are just my recommendations so these have not been taken up by the coastal authority but just some thoughts on what could be the next steps so in relation to distributive justice I think it could be quite beneficial to actually integrate distributive justice assessments similar to the one that I talked about today into national risk assessments so this could be for example integrated into the national risk assessments done through the floods directive

00:38:30
and then this could be used to also provide municipalities with more local data on distributive justice and this would help to really integrate justice considerations quite early on in the planning process so we could actually see who is being exposed to coastal hazards and who is maybe being left behind in terms of where we implement protection or adaptation measures and then in relation to

00:39:00
recognitional justice I've suggested to develop a socially oriented monitoring evaluation and learning framework for adaptation projects and this could be quite helpful so for example in the case of Køge Bugt Strandpark that I mentioned a lot of these issues around safety accessibility and things like that could be kind of tracked over time so when we're actually developing new NBS projects and designing them and kind of

00:39:30
implementing them and also throughout the project's lifetime it could be relevant to actually track some of these social indicators so that we can perhaps avoid some of these issues of recognitional justice in the future and then in relation to procedural justice and this uneven representation of groups in adaptation planning it could be quite helpful to provide a course for municipalities specifically targeting kind of how you ensure justice and participation processes

00:40:00
and looking at inclusive methodologies and this could on the one hand be about how we could better include underrepresented groups in these processes but it could also be for example testing out more innovative practices that support processes that are more grounded in care and justice and things like that and then I also want to say here that justice is not kind of a single indicator that we can measure but it's this really complex

00:40:30
concept and it requires a lot of different assessment approaches and it's really something that must be embedded in all stages of adaptation planning and be more of this kind of overarching standard to guide decision making so in addition to the recommendations that I've just talked about that really relate to more specific stages of adaptation planning and specific analyses that could be done it's also necessary to kind of embed just adaptation into more high level strategic planning to ensure that we're actually

00:41:00
systematically integrating concerns around justice rather than just kind of considering them in specific stages or as kind of ad hoc additions to existing practices and so with that in mind I've created a few more strategic recommendations for the Coastal Authority as well so I think it could be quite beneficial to create a team within the Coastal Authority that's dedicated to impact, adaptation and vulnerability with a kind of dedicated working group

00:41:30
on just adaptation and one of the key tasks of this working group could for example be to develop a national strategy for just adaptation to look at how can we really be integrating justice into all aspects of adaptation and that would go beyond a specific stage but really how we can think about justice considerations distributive, procedural, recognizable and restorative justice across all aspects of adaptation planning and then finally

00:42:00
this recommendation was written before the publication of Cremative Passing Plan TOE but I recommended that we integrate justice into the ongoing revision of the National Adaptation Plan and any forthcoming legislative changes and unfortunately we do see that there is no mention of justice in Cremative Passing Plan TOE so this is still relevant I would say in the future that justice would really be integrated into these more high level planning and strategy documents as well

00:42:30
and then finally beyond these specific recommendations I want to just end by saying a few words around transdisciplinarity so today I focus more on kind of the specific results around justice challenges and possible approaches for operationalizing just adaptation but one of the other key takeaways for my PhD has really been that we really need to be working across methods across disciplines and even across kind of different paradigms

00:43:00
and different ways of seeing the world to understand issues of just adaptation so here for example more kind of positive approaches that use quantitative methods such as the approach that I talked about in relation to a national assessment of distributive justice these can be really important and helpful for establishing baselines and kind of assessing current justice outcomes and saying okay where are we now in relation to just adaptation

00:43:30
but when it comes to for example understanding experiences of injustice on the ground perhaps more interpretivist approaches that are grounded in more qualitative methods and kind of acknowledge multiple realities and kind of plural experiences of justice could be more helpful so for example approaches that are grounded in qualitative fieldwork like the analysis I talked about on assessing recognitional justice in Køge Bugt could be much better suited to these types of challenges

00:44:00
and questions and then finally just adaptation is also something that requires quite a forward looking approach so when it comes to envisioning what just and desirable coastal futures might look like we might actually need to be looking at entirely different kind of paradigms or approaches of doing research so here I've referred to a performative paradigm and that basically means a paradigm where research is not really about representation of existing realities

00:44:30
or understanding existing facts but more about how do we create new knowledge through the research process and this could be for example through approaches like the arts based future visioning workshops that I talked about so how can we really be kind of co-creating future imaginaries together and I think it's really only when we bring together all of these different paradigms and methodological approaches and ways of looking at justice and start to look at how they

00:45:00
relate and conflict that we can start to really understand the kind of complexity of just adaptation and work towards kind of mainstreaming justice in adaptation planning and of course this also requires quite a reorientation in adaptation practice in terms of the types of expertise that we draw on the types of people and actors that we include in planning and kind of how we approach climate change adaptation planning in general

00:45:30
so not an easy task but I think one that would be quite important in relation to achieving just and transformative adaptation in the future and I will leave it there I think but thank you very much and you're welcome to contact me if you have further questions beyond what we can get to now Thank you Thank you so much Mia for this really relevant presentation and perspective on how to integrate social justice

00:46:00
in climate adaptation planning we have one question in the chat from Anna seems that the ABR had some the same challenges as other participatory approaches do you see ways forward in this sense Yeah I think that's definitely true that there are some of the same challenges that certain people will be more vocal and things like that

00:46:30
but I think what we saw with this specific approach was that it was really a way to kind of approach people in different ways and especially groups that are not used to participating in kind of planning meetings or citizen meetings so I think a lot of the value in this was in one sense the arts based nature of it but also just kind of creating these approaches where you kind of meet people

00:47:00
where they are so I think going for example to a playgroup where mothers are present with their children these people probably would not have had the capacity to kind of join a citizen meeting but just going there and kind of being with people in that space I think also does a lot for relationship building and trust and getting people who might not otherwise have spoken in these processes to actually share their perspectives and I think what we saw as well with these processes

00:47:30
was that these groups perhaps did not realize that they had anything to contribute to this conversation right there was a lot of kind of narrative around oh well these people are coming from the coastal authority to do a workshop with us around coastal adaptation and what do we have to say to that but I think it was really helpful to use this kind of artistic practice to reorient this as this is actually about what we want our future to look like and not just around like the technical aspects of coastal adaptation

00:48:00
and I think using these more creative methods can be a kind of easier entry point to that discussion for certain groups Thank you we have another question from Laura You mentioned the different approaches to NBS in the 60's and the 70's and now also the effects of who finances the projects can you elaborate on that what are some of the main approaches to NBS now

00:48:30
and what are the possible challenges regarding justice hmm yeah so I think what I'm referring to there is that there's just this general kind of shift in relation to NBS projects and with the example that I've used here in relation to Køge Bugt Strandpark this was really like a publicly funded project and that was trying to consider these broad social benefits and may have succeeded in certain ways

00:49:00
and failed in others but it was still coming from this desire that everyone should have access to the coast and this really democratic idea that access to nature is important and that we should be providing these kind of publicly funded spaces and I think we really see that shifting now not only in Denmark but kind of globally we see that nature based solutions are increasingly being kind of privately funded and can even be seen as maybe a form of greenwashing in a sense

00:49:30
where we see urban greening and nature based solutions more as tools of kind of for example urban regeneration that are kind of creating gentrification and creating higher costs of living and are perhaps being used not to kind of support broad social well-being or broad biodiversity benefits but primarily as kind of these tools of financial gain and of course they still

00:50:00
have certain co-benefits but these co-benefits might not be as widely realized I guess so I think we see just higher risks now given the kind of planning logic and planning paradigm that people are operating under that there's an even greater risk that we don't consider the social benefits and that there are kind of unintended consequences and maladaptation coming out of that thank you for answering those two questions

00:50:30
we just got another one you mentioned structural injustice was different on Zealand right could you elaborate now or where to find results from grief grave so very interesting to learn more yes yeah so again unfortunately we don't know why and the specific kind of results in relation to this publication have not been published yet but

00:51:00
we currently have a paper under review so I hope that it will come out soon and then that will be kind of published in more detail but I can't say too much more about the specific results at the moment yeah well thank you so much yeah I think that was the last question we really appreciate your time and

00:51:30
everyone have a I think we will just stop a little bit early so have a great day
